# Covid-19 Final roject Introduction:
In this report, SARS-CoV-2 symptoms, lifecycle, testing, and vaccines are explaind followed by charts covering the pandemic test, case, recovery, death, and vaccination totals. This report uses a logit model to determine the log odds relationship between government covid 19 preventative regulations and cases of SARS-CoV-2. Then, this report uses time-series modeling to determine the progression of the pandemic.
# Covid-19 General Information:
A new type of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, started in December 2019 and has caused the COVID-19 global pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 originated in a Chinese city called Wuhan. Coronaviruses are common in animals, and scientists hypothesize that SARS-CoV-2 may have transfered to humans, zoonosis, through the Wuhan food market. SARS stands for severe acute respiratory syndrome. In 2003, there was an outbreak of SARS in China that spread to other countries and then ended in 2004. SARS-CoV-2 has spread faster than the 2003 SARS. SARS-CoV-2 is spread when an infected person coughs or sneezes droplets of saliva or mucus with the virus into the air. The respiratory droplets usually do not go further than a few feet, are airbourne for a few moments, and then land on a surface. SARS-CoV-2 has an incubation period of 2 to 14 days and the symptoms of the virus include cough, fever or chills, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, muscle or body aches, sore throat, loss of taste or smell, diarrhea, headache, fatigue, nausea or vomiting, congestion or runny nose, and in rare cases the virus can lead to difficulty walking, confusion, bluish face or lips, coughing up blood, severe respiratory problems, kidney failure, high fever, or death. The following is a diagram of the symptoms.
# SARS-CoV-2 Biology:
Coronaviruses are a sphere-like 20-sided polygon, icosahedron, shape and belong to the Nidovirales order. SARS-CoV-2 travels through the respitory tract and attaches itself to alveoli, air sacs, in the lungs. Coronaviruses are named after the dyed red spike glycoproteins (S) that cover them and attach these protiens by being activated by the host cell's proteases, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 ennzymes, at a sequential proteolytic cleavage S1 and S2 site to fuse with a host cell's enzymes to enter, endocytosis, the cell's plasma membrane to the cytosol. S1 is the end binding region of the S protein and S2 is the beam of the S protien. The spike glcoproteins can also attach to a cell's endosomes being activated by the host cell's CTSL enzyme. Inside of the icosahedron positive-sensed lipid bilayer envelope is a helical capsid (N) that encloses a nucleic acid genome, which encodes the viral genetic information -- non-segmented-single-stranded RNA -- that is used during the lytic cycle to generate RNA polymerase, protease, and other proteins. The virus leaves the capsid ouside of the cell when performing endocytosis. The DNA template of the host cell is transcribed by helicase enzyme separating the two nucleic acid strands of the DNA, the DNA polymerase enzyme catalyzes the synthesis of RNA molecules -- adenine (A) to uracil (U), thymine (T) to adenine (A), guanine (G) to cytosine (C), and cytosine (C) to guanine (G)-- and the DNA ligase enzyme joins the strands to make multiple genomic and subgenomic viral mRNA. The mRNA is then translated with ribosomes using tRNA that attaches anticodons to the mRNA codons in the Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum to build viral amino acid molecules that form a viral protien chain of polypeptides that are further assembled in the Golgi Aparatus and then stored in vesicles. The dyed yellow envelope proteins (E) and dyed orange membrane glycoproteins (M) assist in budding -- using the host cell's plasma membrane for envelope formation -- and then exiting, exocytosis, the host cell through lysis. The following is a diagram of the SARS-CoV-2 lifecycle.
ACE2 modulates the activity of the angiotensin II protein, which increases blood pressure and inflammation. The SARS-CoV-2 virus binding to ACE2 inhibits ACE2 and can cause an increase in cell inflammation resulting in the death of cells in the alveoli units with hypoxic fluid flooding, an increase in blood preasure damaging blood vessels causing microvascular thrombosis, and the tranduction of the kidney podocytes resulting in acute kidney injury. The following is a diagram of the enzymes that get inhibited and the parts of the body that can get damaged.
# Testing for SARS-CoV-2:
A patient can be tested for SARS-CoV-2 with the sequence-specific molecular nucleic acid assay, or the antigen-specific immunoassay. For a molecular-assay, a nasal or saliva sample is collected from upper respiratory fluid and then Real-time RT-PCR is conducted to quantify sequences within the RNA samples. Reverse transcriptase converts extracted RNA into cDNA that is used as a template for DNA polymerase to complete the strand of dsDNA and then RT-PCR amplifies the genetic regions and fluorescent probes bind to the regions for identification. For an immuno-assay, antibodies are put on a membrane and complexed with a potentialy virulent sample of which any antigen will be trapped that results in the membrane changing color. A SARS-CoV-2 recovered patient can be tested for whether the patient has developed anibodies against the virus by checking a blood sample for the antibodies. The following are diagrams of a molecular and immuno assay.
# Vaccines for SARS-CoV-2:
Vaccines have been developed to combat SARS-CoV-2. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine (BNT162b2) and The ModernaTX, Inc vaccine (mRNA-1273) are mRNA vaccines. mRNA vaccines deliver lab designed viral mRNA made by coding both the 5’-untranslated region (UTR) and the 3’-UTR into cells where it is translated into the encoded antigen to which an immune recognition by white blood cells, immunogenicity, results. The AstraZeneca in collaboration with the University of Oxford vaccine (AZD1222) is an adenovirus vaccine. Adenovirus vaccines are first gene sub-cloned into an intermediary vector, transfered to an adenovirus recombinant genome vector, transfected into packaging cells, amplified into a culture stock, and then titrated to determine the concentration of active adenoviruses in the stock. The adenoviruse is then delivered to cells where immunogenicity results. The following is a diagram of Virus vector DNA and mRNA vaccine immune response production.
Vaccines have been developed to combat SARS-CoV-2. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine (BNT162b2) and The ModernaTX, Inc vaccine (mRNA-1273) are mRNA vaccines. mRNA vaccines deliver lab designed viral mRNA made by coding both the 5’-untranslated region (UTR) and the 3’-UTR into cells where it is translated into the encoded antigen to which an immune recognition by white blood cells, immunogenicity, results. The AstraZeneca in collaboration with the University of Oxford vaccine (AZD1222) is an adenovirus vaccine. Adenovirus vaccines are first gene sub-cloned into an intermediary vector, transfered to an adenovirus recombinant genome vector, transfected into packaging cells, amplified into a culture stock, and then titrated to determine the concentration of active adenoviruses in the stock. The adenoviruse is then delivered to cells where immunogenicity results. The following is a diagram of Virus vector DNA and mRNA vaccine immune response production.
